## Reporting issues, questions, or requesting enhancements

This project uses [GitHub
Issues](https://github.com/alex-hhh/ActivityLog2/issues) for tracking defects
and enhancement proposals.  If you have a bug, a question or want an
enhancement, create a new issue for it, but please check if the problem has
already been reported.

Provide a complete description of the issue -- if the description is unclear,
or if I cannot reproduce reported bug, I might ask for clarification.  Any
issues that have incomplete descriptions and don't receive responses after 4
weeks will be closed.

All issues, including any attached files are public, please keep this in mind
if you want to attach a FIT file to an issue -- the FIT file will usually
contain GPS information which can be used to identify your location.  Do not
attach these files unless you are comfortable with them being publicly
available.

## Contributing code or documentation

The [build.md](./build.md) file contains information about building the
application, and links to some documents describing how things work.  You
might find it helpful if you want to work on the code.

This project uses the normal GitHub Fork and Pull Request mechanism.  To
contribute changes to the project create a pull request.  As with issues,
please provide a good description of your changes.

If you are looking for ideas on what to work on, have a look at the list of
[open issues](https://github.com/alex-hhh/ActivityLog2/issues), or at the
[projects](https://github.com/alex-hhh/ActivityLog2/projects) page, if
something on those lists sounds interesting and you don't know how to
implement them, ask a question and I will try to provide guidance. You can
also work on things that are not listed there, but consider creating an issue
first and discussing the proposal.

## Trivial and cosmetic contributions will not be accepted

Examples of such contributions are:

* Fixing a few spelling or grammar errors
* Fixing code indentation
* Fixing white space problems with the source files

If you want to contribute to this project consider improving the
documentation, reporting bugs, fixing a bug or adding a new feature.
